HOWTO_UNMAINTAINED.md: guide for unmaintained crate advisories (#1192)
rustsec/advisory-db: HOWTO_UNMAINTAINED.md

# HOWTO Guide: Unmaintained Crate Advisories

This document describes the policy for adding advisories for unmaintained
crates to the [RustSec Advisory Database].

These advisories serve to inform the Rust community about both the existence
of unmaintained crates within a particular project, and also serve to guide

> switching to maintained alternatives.

Reviewer: I've seen this as a pretty big influence when going through the registry for an alternative, so its nice to see called out here.

Should this guide have a small section with a few tips about setting up the `alternatives` field in the advisory and any advice picking one (ie don't put things with almost no downloads, outstanding soundness issues, etc)?

Author: Yes! I strongly agree there should be more information about trying to collect recommended alternatives to an unmaintained crate in order to keep the advisories actionable.

Reviewer: Here's my rough barrel of them and why:
- \~relatively\~ widely-used. The crate should have an all-time download count >= 1,000. The goal isn't to eliminate unpopular options, but to recommend something that more than a few people have put trust into.
- No outstanding soundness or security bugs: This would just lead from fixing one advisory to a different, worse one.
- Active maintenance: The inverse of the de-facto unmaintained guidelines here should apply to the repository/crate/etc
- Relevant: The proposed alternate crate should offer APIs that do the same thing and have (ideally...) minimal changes required to migrate over. Someone shouldn't need to re-build their project around an API difference. I admit that this one is pretty shaky, but maybe it could be worded in a nudging style instead of a requirement?

Author: Those sound like fairly reasonable guidelines

## Definition of an "unmaintained" crate

We consider crates unmaintained when they fall into either of the following
categories:

> - Explicitly unmaintained: a crate's author has declared that they are no

Reviewer 2: Is a repo being marked as archived explicitly or implicitly unmaintaining it (assuming there *is* a linked repo to the crate, and there's no indication that it's not the primary one)?

Author: An archived repo is certainly a signal that a crate is unmaintained, however we'd still ask the author for clarity in that case unless they have left an explicit commit message to that effect

  longer maintaining a particular crate.
- Implicitly unmaintained: the author is incommunicado for a prolonged period
  of time and cannot advise as to a crate's status.

## Creating an unmaintained crate advisory

### Policy

When in doubt, we always defer to the author of a crate's discretion as to
whether they would prefer an unmaintained crate advisory be filed, provided
we are able to make contact.

First and foremost: *ASK THE AUTHOR(S)*, preferably in a public issue on the
project's source code repository. If an author/maintainer of a particular crate

> thinks filing an unmaintained crate advisory is a good idea, then great! Go ahead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thinks filing an unmaintained crate advisory is a good idea, then great! Go ahead.
```

If the author is responsive and declares that the project *is* maintained, then

> the from the perspective of RustSec is maintained. Again, when in doubt, defer

Reviewer: Chopped sentence?

```suggestion
the from the perspective of RustSec the crate is maintained. Again, when in doubt, defer
```

> If the author is responsive and declares that the project *is* maintained, then
> the from the perspective of RustSec is maintained. Again, when in doubt, defer

Reviewer: As an alternate wording that reads over a bit smoother:
```suggestion
If the author is responsive and declares that the project *is* maintained, then
the RustSec organization considers it maintained and won't accept advisories about its maintenance status. Again, when in doubt, defer
```

Author: I like your suggested wording but the suggestion has become unmergeable from the GitHub UI.

Reviewer: I was wondering how it'd behave with two changes on the same spot, guess that's answered. I copy/pasted the suggestion into https://github.com/rustsec/advisory-db/pull/1192#discussion_r805106812

Author: Cool, thanks

> If the author is responsive and declares that the project *is* maintained, then
> the from the perspective of RustSec the crate is maintained. Again, when in doubt, defer

Reviewer: Duplicated from [here](https://github.com/rustsec/advisory-db/pull/1192#discussion_r805103804) since GitHub's UI died.

```suggestion
If the author is responsive and declares that the project *is* maintained, then
the RustSec organization considers it maintained and won't accept advisories about its maintenance status. Again, when in doubt, defer
```

recent commits, open issues, latest release, etc are not reasons to go against
the direct word of a crate author.

However, if attempts have been made to contact a crate author have failed,
metrics like recent commits, open issues, time since last crate release etc
are important evidence to justify that a crate is unmaintained. An
incommunicado crate author is irrelevant if there is evidence that work is
continuing to happen on a crate.

To justify the "implicitly unmaintained" status, where a crate author is
unreachable, the following criteria must be met:

- Stale repository: no recent maintenance activity, including any of the
  following: recent commits, responses from the author on open issues,
  crate releases, or other publically visible activity by the author.
  Inactivity over a period of 1 year or more is the preferred threshold.
- Contact attempts with the author made with no response. Ideally these
  attempts are made via a public GitHub issue, so that issue can be
  cited in an unmaintained crate advisory if need be. Unresponsiveness
  by the author over a period of 90 days is suggested before filing an

>   advisory.

Reviewer 3: I'd suggest at least also trying to send an email outside of GitHub directly to any email addresses from maintainers that can be harvested (for example, from GitHub commits). I've found several times that maintainers who were hard to reach via GitHub were much more responsive via email.
